New PL design notes (#1163)
functionalscript/functionalscript: todo/new-pl.md

# New PL

**Priority:** P3
**Status:** open

## Problem

If we can start from scratch how would it look like.

## Proposal

### JSON compatibility

JSON and its derivatives such as YAML are the most popular data formats. It has the most essential types that are used in modern information technologies:

- `boolean`
- `string`
- `number`
- `array`
- `object` - essentially a dictionary
- `null`

And this is understandable because JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is derived from JavaScript and uses its basic types.

```json
{
    "a": "hello",
    "b": [12, -34.67, null],
    "c": false,
}
```

Even if we don't always like the syntax, the semantics of these basic types make a lot of practical sense in modern computer science and software engineering, having the most popular basic types and allowing grouping by order (arrays) and mapping (objects).

### Data JavaScript

> FunctionalScript already defines a subset of JavaScript which is stricter, has no side effects and supports all JSON types. We also would like to make it serializable, which makes it a kind of ideal PL for handling data and communications, including as data for AI agents and models. Example:

Author: ```suggestion
FunctionalScript already defines a subset of JavaScript, has no side effects, and supports all JSON types. We also would like to make it serializable, which makes it a kind of ideal PL for handling data and communications, including as data for AI agents and models. Example:
```

```js
export const hello = "Hello, world!"
export const add = (a, b) => a + b
```

One of the subsets of FunctionalScript is DJS (Data JavaScript), when the module contains only data, for example

```js
export default {
    "a": "hello",
    "b": [12, -34.67, null],
    "c": false
}
```

Or

```js
export default {
    a: 'hello',
    b: [12, -34.67, null],
    c: false
}
```

You just need to add `export default` at the beginning of your JSON.

> Moving further, we will use FunctionalScript as a foundation to build our programming language. A key design constraint is that most existing FunctionalScript modules should be reusable in the new language with little or no modification. This gives us a large library from day one and means the new PL can be validated incrementally against real code rather than toy examples.

Author: ```suggestion
Moving further, we will use FunctionalScript as a foundation to build our programming language. A key design constraint is that most existing FunctionalScript modules should be reusable in the new language with little or no modification. This gives us a large library from day one and means the new PL can be validated incrementally against real code.
```

While content-addressability makes some FunctionalScript very cool, we still would like to have some additional features in a programming language designed from scratch. For example, we would like to have a hash of an object — a kind of universal, serializable object identity.

```js
const emptyArrayId1 = Object.id([])
const emptyArrayId2 = Object.id([])

export default assert(emptyArrayId1, emptyArrayId2)
```

`Object.id` returns the canonical content-hash of its argument, so two structurally equal values always yield the same id. Without this `Object.id` core function, FunctionalScript could be more like content-equatable instead of fully content-addressable.

One invariant must always hold within a VM version: the same object always produces the same id. However, the concrete hash value is not guaranteed to be stable across VM versions — if a future VM switches to a different hash algorithm (e.g. for security or collision-resistance reasons), the same object would produce a different id. This means persisted ids are implicitly tied to the VM version that produced them, and cross-version id comparison requires a migration or a version-tagged id format.

> Function identity is a harder problem. Two functions are semantically equal if they produce the same output for every input, but proving that in general is undecidable (equivalent to the halting problem). The practical solution is structural equality: two functions are considered the same if they have the same normalized AST or bytecode. This is decidable and cheap to compute.

Author: ```suggestion
Function identity is a harder problem. Two functions are semantically equal if they produce the same output for every possible input, but proving that in general is undecidable (equivalent to the halting problem, see also [Rice's theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rice's_theorem)). The practical solution is structural equality: two functions are considered the same if they have the same normalized AST or bytecode. This is decidable and cheap to compute.
```

```ts
const a = 2   // typeof(a) === 'bigint'
const b = 2.0 // typeof(b) === 'number' (IEEE 754 64-bit double)
```

Python provides a useful precedent. Python 2 had two integer types: `int` (fixed-width, 32 or 64-bit) and `long` (arbitrary-precision), with `2L` as the bigint literal — mirroring JavaScript's current split between `number` and `bigint`. [Python 3 unified them](https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.0.html#integers): `int` is now always arbitrary-precision and `long` was removed ([PEP 237](https://peps.python.org/pep-0237/)). The literal `2` is a bigint in Python 3 with no special suffix needed — exactly the behaviour proposed here.

### UTF8 String

Current implementation of a `string` in JavaScript is UTF-16. While we can have a proposal that ECMAScript supports a new type `utf8`, something like `u'Hello, world!'`, the default JS string will always be UTF-16. In a new PL, we don't want to have UTF-16 at all, only UTF-8.

### Separation Between Arrays and Objects

> Arrays shouldn't be a subset of objects. It should be a separate type.

Author: ```suggestion
An array type shouldn't be derived from an object type. It should be a separate type.
```

```js
import { check } from 'my-type-system'

const add = check((a: number, b: number): number => a + b)
```

This has several advantages:

- Users choose the type system that fits their needs (simple RTTI, dependent types, gradual typing, etc.)
- The same type-checking logic runs at both compile time and runtime — no separate type-checker binary
- Different modules in the same program can use different type systems
- New type systems can be published as ordinary packages without changes to the core language

### Serializable AST

JavaScript's `Function.prototype.toString()` exposes source text, but it is unreliable: all major engines produce incorrect output for closures that capture variables from an outer scope, because the returned string omits the surrounding context needed to reconstruct the function's meaning.

The new PL exposes the AST directly as a serializable value:

```js
const add = (a, b) => a + b

const ast = Function.getAst(add)   // returns a plain serializable object
const add2 = Function.fromAst(ast) // reconstructs the function

assert(add(1, 2) === add2(1, 2))
```

> Because the AST is a plain data value it can be stored, transmitted, inspected, and transformed without a parser. Combined with `Object.id`, the AST of a function is also its canonical identity (see Content-Addressability). `Function.fromAst` on a different VM or a future VM version must either reproduce the same behaviour or reject the AST explicitly — it must never silently produce a different result.

Author: ```suggestion
Because the AST is a plain data value (most likely JSON), it can be stored, transmitted, inspected, and transformed without a parser. Combined with `Object.id`, the AST of a function is also its canonical identity (see Content-Addressability). `Function.fromAst` on a different VM or a future VM version must either reproduce the same behavior or reject the AST explicitly — it must never silently produce a different result.
```
